A baby’s brain grows rapidly
during the last trimester of pregnancy,
triples in size during the first
year after birth,
and continues to develop rapidly
throughout the first 2 years of life.
Fat makes up more than half of
the brain’s dry weight.
primary fat in nerve cells of
the developing and infant brain
is docosahexaenoic acid or DHA.
One important role for DHA
is as a component of myelin,
which covers nerve fibers.
Myelin ensures that nerve
impulses move quickly and correctly.
With less myelin,
impulses travel more slowly,
delaying movement of information
from one cell to the next.
There is also a high concentration of
DHA in the junctions between nerve cells.
Nerve cells communicate across
these junctions, called synapses.
Peak formation of synapses begins at
34 weeks’ gestation and continues
through the first 24 months of life.
DHA is also a primary component of
nerve cells in the retina,
the light-sensitive tissue lining the
inner surface of the eye.
DHA is a member of the family of
omega-3 fatty acids.
Essential fatty acids or EFA’s
must be obtained from your diet.
Cold water fish,
a traditional source of dietary DHA,
get DHA from algae in their diet.
However, many fish today are farm-raised
and fed corn and soy meal
and only wild salmon and trout
consistently supply DHA.
Breast milk, unlike cow’s milk,
contains a significant amount of DHA.
Levels depend on the mother’s diet.
Other good sources are foods
fortified with algal-DHA
which comes directly from algae,
and algal-DHA supplements.